.
 Indian Philosophy Hello everyone Today in this session we will discuss about Indian Philosophy and Significance of Sanskrit Language Indian Philosophy Philosophy literally means the love of knowledge or more precisely the love of wisdom .


Like all other living beings man struggles for existence .


But while the lower beings struggle more or less blindly without any conscious plan and purpose and work by instinct man uses the superior gift of his intellect to understand the conditions and meaning of the struggle and to devise plans and instruments to ensure success .




He wishes to lead his life in the light of his knowledge of himself and the world taking into consideration not merely the immediate results of his actions but even their reaching consequences .


Desire for knowledge springs therefore from the rational nature of man .


It is not therefore a mere luxury but a necessity

He wishes to lead his life in the light of his knowledge of himself and the world taking into consideration not merely the immediate results of his actions but even their reaching consequences .


Desire for knowledge springs therefore from the rational nature of man .


It is not therefore a mere luxury but a necessity









The Vedas Upanishads Puranas and Dharmasutras are all written in Sanskrit .




By reading about the languages and literature created in the past we shall be able to understand our civilization better and appreciate the diversity and richness of our culture .




All this was possible because of the language that developed during that time .
 Sanskrit which is the most ancient language of our country The ancient period of Indian philosophy is the period of the composition of Vedas and the Upaniṣads .


The main philosophical themes that the Upaniṣads explore are the nature of the Absolute Brahman as the ground of being and the importance of knowledge of Brahman as the key to liberation .


Vedas and Upanishads Now let know about Vedas

The Vedas were written in Sanskrit and were handed down orally from one generation to the other .




In Hindu culture Vedas are considered as eternal and divine revelations .


They treat the whole world as one human family Vasudev Kutumbakam There are four Vedas Rig Veda Yajur Veda Sama Veda and Atharva Veda .


Rig Veda



It is believed that these recitations are the natural outpouring of Vedic rishis experiencing a mentally transcendental stage .


Yajur Veda

This Veda is concerned mostly with rites and mantras of different sacrifices .


Being a treatise on rituals it is the most popular of the four Vedas .


There are two major branches of Yajur Veda namely Shukla and Krishna Yajur Veda Vajasaneyi Samhita and Taitriya Samhita .


Sama Veda Sama means melody or songs .


This Veda consists of ragas and raginis or musical notes .


The Sama Veda prescribes the tunes for the recitation of the hymns of the Rig Veda .


Atharva Veda The Atharva Veda is also known as the Brahma Veda .


The source of this Veda is traced to two rishis called Atharvah and Angiras .


The Atharva Veda is of immense value as it represents the religious ideas at an early period of civilization .


This book gives detailed information about the family social and political life of later Vedic period .


Brahmanas and Aranyakas After the four Vedas a number of works called the Brahmanas were developed .


The latter portions of the Brahmanas were called the Aranyakas while the final parts of the Aranyakas are philosophic books named Upanishads which belong to the later stage of the Brahmana literature .


These were studied and taught by men in Vanprastha Munis and the inhabitants living inside the forests .


Initially they were handed down orally and were put to writing much later .


Upanishad

Groups of pupils sit near the Guru to learn from him in the Guru shishya parampara or tradition .


As the Upanishads contain abstract and difficult discussions of ultimate philosophical problems they were taught to the pupils at the end .


That is why they are called the end of Vedas .


In this session I hope you learnt an introduction to Indian Philosophy significance of Sanskrit languages brief understanding on vedas and upanishads .


Next session we will know about the great Epics of our country Ramayana and Mahabaratha Thank you